M language, DAX, let's create a quick example to better understand the differences of those two languages.
So here I am back in our course project and we want work on that beautiful visualization for the moment
but we will go to the query editor, our good old friend back again. So we can click onto edit queries right
here
and here we could select the Age-Group table, the DIM-AgeGroup table, right there.
So here we are in our DIM-AgeGroup table, you know the table of course and you also know the applied steps
column to the right,
now another thing you know is that you can see the last step in M language in that formula bar,
so basically what happened with that change type from a code perspective in M language.
Now if you might want to see more about the M language, so maybe what happened with all of those steps
you can see in this language, you can simply do that by going to the home ribbon and then open the advanced
editor, like this.
If I drag that to the left a little bit and then you can see that each of the applied steps
was performed by the M language the way we can see right here, step-by-step.
So you can find the remove other columns, the removed duplicates or the duplicated column, everything in the
applied steps
also in the advanced editor. This is what the M language basically looks like
and the important thing for the moment is that you wrote a lot of M code without writing code because
you only applied the predefined functionalities the query editor has. Now that we know that,
let's press on to done and now create a new column using the M language. Now to do this,
we simply go to add column and now create a custom column like this
and let's name that column M-Test like this
and now we want to combine two things,
let me drag that down.
So I want to combine the Age-Group with the category, I know this doesn't make a lot of sense but I just want
to show you how you could write formulas or really basic formulas of course in M language,
so let's click on to the Age-Group right here and onto the category and to combine those two items,
you can simply write
an AND between those two columns, like this.
So if you now press OK, you can see that we have a new column but that's not named the way I want it to be,
so let me quickly edit that column by clicking right here and now add a second AND, two quotation marks
and a space just to have a little bit more distance between those two column names and press OK again
and now this is fine.
Let's format it as text like this
and now we got that
and now there is one thing that you might note.
We of course have that added custom and that change types step right here
and we also have the formula bar but the formula bar doesn't look like what we did in the custom column
menu,
right?
So you remember, let's go back to that menu,
you can see that we simply selected the columns and then this new column was created
and again, this is due to the fact that the M code, the code you can see right here was created automatically
based on that help window that we have.
So again this is what we did,
we used M code without really writing M code. Now that
we know that,
let's go back to our data model and do the same thing in DAX language,
let's see how this works.
So we have to go to home and press close and apply, right here,
now it takes a few seconds to load the queries and here we are in the data model again.
Now let's go to data view
and here we have that M-Test column that we just created,
now we want to create the same column actually using DAX formulas. To do this,
we can simply go to the modeling ribbon up here and now create a new column, let's click it
and now you don't see any menu that opens,
you only see a formula bar up here and in this formula bar,
you can for instance select the name and rename it to DAX-Test for instance.
This is the name, if I now press enter,
well nothing happens because the formula is not valid,
so let's change that.
So what we want to do is we want to combine the Age-Group column with the category column again.
Now what we could do is we could simply click that column, like this. This didn't work, right
so we have to select our formula or our column right here again to change that.
Now to combine those two columns, we have two options or two formulas that we can use. One formula is
really similar to the one that we just applied in the query editor, let's start with that formula first.
Now the first thing you have to do is we have to refer to another column, to the Age-Group column. To do this,
we have to write a square bracket first and now we can see that we can select all the columns that we
have in that table that we selected,
in our case we can select the Age-Group column and you can navigate through the columns with the up and down arrow
keys on the keyboard.
If you found the column that you want to select, so the Age-Group column in our case, you can simply press
tab like this
and now you selected the first column.
Now you want to combine this column with another one and you can apply the same thing that we did in
the query editor,
so we can simply write AND, quotation mark, space, quotation marks and that. Now you see in this case, the
DAX language looks like the same that we had in the query editor but remember, in the query editor, we wrote that in
that additional window
but when we looked at the actual code, this looked a lot different than that,
so keep that in mind.
So we want to refer to the second column right now,
so we are again write the square bracket and now select the category and press tab again.
If we now press enter like this, then we have the same result that we had in the query editor
but with the pure formula,
in this case the formula stays the same, it doesn't change the way we did it in the query editor,
so the formula remains exactly the same as we wrote it.
Now we got the result that we want to have,
so we calculated that column both in the query editor and in the data model.
However I told you that the DAX language is a little bit comparable to Excel and Excel is about formulas
with specific functions
and at the moment, I don't see real formulas right here.
Now let's create another column which will retrieve the same result that we can see right here
but with a real formula, let's do this.
So we will click on new column again
and call that DAX-Test, whoops,
two maybe
and now we write the first formula in DAX and this formula is called concatenate, like this
and as you can see, this formula joins two text strings into one single string, into one text string.
So this is what we want,
so if you press tab and now select the first text string and how can you do this, by writing the square
brackets again, like this,
select Age-Group and press tab
and now add the second string like this and now select the category and press tab and press enter, then
you can see that we added another column with almost the same result
but there is the space missing between those two text strings right.
Now let's change that by nesting the formula,
this is also something that you will find in the DAX language, you will kind of combine the formulas or
create bigger formulas.
Let's see how this works.
So nesting simply means in that case that I use the first concatenate,
so I say this is the first part, now I add a second concatenate right here and press tab
and now the first text is this one,
so a space and the second text remains the category one. If we now press enter,
then we can see that we now have that space in our DAX formula or in the column calculated with the DAX
formula.
This is nice,
so now we saw how we can create those two columns with the two languages we have
but what does this mean for our course right now?
Let's think about that in the next video.